# BLOOM: BigScience Language Open-source Open-access Multilingual Model Card
Version 1.0 / 20.May.2022

## Model Details  
*This section provides basic information about what the model is, its current status, and where it comes from.*

### Basics
*This section provides information relevant to anyone who wants to know about the model.*

**Developed by:** [BigScience](https://bigscience.huggingface.co)  
All collaborators are either volunteers or have an agreement with their employer.

**Model Type:** Transformer-based Language Model

**Version:** 1.0.0

**Languages:** Multiple; see [training data](#training-data).

**License:** [RAIL License v1.0](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10NMjEKjxR7mrZ5CvugGBVaF6nPEgNxFBIbkH7z5HB-0/edit#)

**Released:** Forthcoming

**Send questions to:** bigscience-contact@googlegroups.com

**Cite as:** [BigScience Workshop](https://bigscience.huggingface.co), BigScience Language Open-source Open-access Multilingual (BLOOM). International, May 2021-May 2022.

### Technical Specifications
*This section provides information for people who work on model development.*

**Model Architecture:** Modified from Megatron-LM GPT2:

1.  A word embeddings layer normalization

2.  ALiBI positional encodings.

**Objective Function:** [Cross Entropy with mean reduction](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.CrossEntropyLoss.html#torch.nn.CrossEntropyLoss)

**Number of Parameters:** 176B parameters; 70 layers, 112 attention heads

#### Infrastructure

Compute Infrastructure: [Jean Zay](http://www.idris.fr/eng/jean-zay/jean-zay-presentation-eng.html) Public Supercomputer, provided by the French government

Hardware: 384 A100 80GB GPUs (48 nodes)

-   Additional 32 A100 80GB GPUs (4 nodes) in reserve

-   8 GPUs per node Using NVLink 4 inter-gpu connects, 4 OmniPath links

-   CPU: AMD

-   CPU memory: 512GB per node

-   GPU memory: 640GB per node

-   Inter-node connect: Omni-Path Architecture (OPA)

-   NCCL-communications network: a fully dedicated subnet

-   Disc IO network: shared network with other types of nodes

Software:

-   [Megatron-DeepSpeed](https://github.com/bigscience-workshop/Megatron-DeepSpeed), BigScience fork

-   [DeepSpeed](https://github.com/microsoft/DeepSpeed)

-   [PyTorch](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch)-1.11 w/ CUDA-11.5

-   [apex](https://github.com/NVIDIA/apex) 

#### Training
_In progress._

Checkpoint size:

-   Bf16 weights: 329GB

-   Full checkpoint with optimizer states: 2.3TB

Training throughput: About 150 TFLOP per GPU per second

Number of epochs: 1 (current target)

Dates: 
- Started 11th March, 2022 11:42am PST.
- Planned end: 5th July, 2022.  

Estimated carbon emissions:  Forthcoming

Estimated electricity usage: Forthcoming

Estimated cost of training: Equivalent of $7-15M

Funding source: French government and individual labs of contributors.

Server training location: Ile-de-France, France

## Uses

*This section addresses questions around how the model is intended to be used, discusses the foreseeable users of the model (including those affected by the model), and describes uses that are considered out of scope or misuse of the model. 
It provides information for people considering using the model or who are affected by the model.*

### Intended use

This model is being created in order to enable public research on large language models (LLMs). LLMs are intended to be used for language generation or as a pretrained base model that can be further fine-tuned for specific tasks. Use cases below are not exhaustive.

#### **Direct Use**

-   Text generation

-   Exploring characteristics of language generated by a language model.

    -   Examples: Cloze tests, counterfactuals, generations with reframings.

#### **Downstream Use**

-   Tasks that leverage language models include: Information Extraction, Question Answering, Summarization.

### Misuse and Out-of-scope Use

*This section addresses what users ought not do with the model.*

See the  [LLM LICENSE ](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10NMjEKjxR7mrZ5CvugGBVaF6nPEgNxFBIbkH7z5HB-0/edit), Attachment A, for detailed usage restrictions. The below list is non-exhaustive, but lists some easily foreseeable problematic use cases.

#### **Out-of-scope Uses**

Using the model in [high-stakes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uQ_w-DlBsqAm8i_PEAs6HUVxmZ60yhfvrFDcvvMd8os/edit#bookmark=id.grey8ubq0nvg) settings is out of scope for this model.  The model is not designed for [critical decisions](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uQ_w-DlBsqAm8i_PEAs6HUVxmZ60yhfvrFDcvvMd8os/edit#bookmark=id.5fu0y76t5a0n) nor uses with any material consequences on an individual's livelihood or wellbeing. The model outputs content that appears factual but is not correct.  

##### Out-of-scope uses include:

-   Usage in biomedical domains, political and legal domains, or finance domains.

-   Usage for evaluating or scoring individuals, such as for employment, education, or credit.

-   Applying the model for critical automatic decisions, generating factual content, creating reliable summaries, or generating predictions that must be correct.

#### **Misuse**

Intentionally using the model for harm, violating rights, or other kinds of malicious activities is a misuse of this model. This includes:

-   Spam generation

-   Disinformation and influence operations

-   Disparagement and defamation

-   Harassment and abuse
  
-   Deception

-   Unconsented impersonation and imitation

-   Unconsented surveillance 


-   Generating content without attribution to the model, as specified in the [RAIL License, Use Restrictions](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10NMjEKjxR7mrZ5CvugGBVaF6nPEgNxFBIbkH7z5HB-0/edit#heading=h.3blioxkgzsje).

### Intended Users

#### **Direct Users**

-   General Public

-   Researchers

-   Students

-   Educators

-   Engineers/developers

-   Non-commercial entities

-   Community advocates, including human and civil rights groups

#### Indirect Users

-   Users of derivatives created by Direct Users, such as those using software with an [intended use](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uQ_w-DlBsqAm8i_PEAs6HUVxmZ60yhfvrFDcvvMd8os/edit#heading=h.t4zedx9s7smn).

-   Users of [Derivatives of the Model, as described in the License](https://docs.google.com/document/d/117RhytMYC9HS-1NmWHEn9XBK7vJ5kdv9OcG6AV69Vec/edit#bookmark=id.pvl8781qfes3).

#### Others Affected (Parties prenantes)

-   People and groups referred to by the LLM

-   People and groups exposed to outputs of, or decisions based on, the LLM

-   People and groups whose original work is included in the LLM

## Training Data

-   Training data includes:

    -   45 natural languages and programming languages.

    -   In 1.5TB of pre-processed text, converted into 350B unique tokens.

    -   See the [Model README, Datasets for more](https://github.com/bigscience-workshop/bigscience/tree/master/train/tr11-176B-ml#datasets).

- Data Cards for each training dataset available at: [BigScienceCorpus](https://huggingface.co/spaces/bigscience/BigScienceCorpus), with the exception of OSCAR and the Niger-Congo languages.

## Risks and Limitations
*This section identifies foreseeable harms and misunderstandings.*

Model may:

-   Overrepresent some viewpoints and underrepresent others

-   Contain stereotypes
  
-   Contain personal information


-   Generate:

    -   Hateful, abusive, or violent language

    -   Discriminatory or prejudicial language

    -   Content that may not be appropriate for all settings, including sexual content.

-   Make errors, including producing incorrect information as if it were factual.

-   Generate irrelevant or repetitive outputs.
  
## Carbon Footprint

The training supercomputer, Jean Zay, uses mostly nuclear energy, and the heat generated by it is reused for heating campus housing. We are also tallying the overall carbon footprint of both training and upstream tasks, which we will report after training has been completed.

## Evaluation
  
### Factors
*The section lists the different kinds of variables that affect how this model behaves. These factors inform how the evaluation should be disaggregated in order to understand how the model works for different populations and in different contexts.*

#### **Language**

<table>

<tr><td>


```mermaid
pie showData
    title All
    "Niger Congo": 0.03
    "Basque" : 0.20
    "Indonesian" : 1.10
    "Catalan" : 1.10
    "Indic" : 2.10
    "Vietnamese" : 2.50
    "Arabic" : 3.30
    "Portuguese" : 5.00
    "Spanish" : 10.70
    "Code" : 13.00
    "French" : 13.10
    "Chinese" : 17.70
    "English" :  30.30
    
```
| Indic     |  Percentage |
| ---       |      ---    |
| Assamese  |     0.01%   |
| Odia      |     0.04%   |
| Gujarati  |     0.04%   |
| Marathi   |     0.05%   |
| Punjabi   |     0.05%   |
| Kannada   |     0.06%   |
| Nepali    |     0.07%   |
| Telugu    |     0.09%   |
| Malayalam |     0.10%   |
| Urdu      |     0.10%   |
| Tamil     |     0.20%   |
| Bengali   |     0.50%   |
| Hindi     |     0.70%   |

</td><td>


```mermaid
pie showData
    title Niger Congo:
   "Chi Tumbuka" : 0.00
    "Kikuyu" : 0.00
    "Bambara" : 0.00
    "Akan" : 0.00
    "Xitsonga" : 0.00
    "Sesotho" : 0.00
    "Chi Chewa" : 0.00
    "Twi" :  0.00
    "Setswana" :  0.00
    "Lingala" : 0.00
    "Northern Sotho" :  0.00
    "Fon" :  0.00
    "Kirundi" :   0.00
    "Wolof" :   0.00
    "Luganda" :   0.00
    "Chi Shona" :  0.00
    "Isi Zulu" :  0.00
    "Igbo" :  0.00
    "Xhosa" :  0.00
    "Kinyarwanda" :  0.00
    "Yoruba" :   0.01
    "Swahili" :   0.02

```

```mermaid
pie showData
    title Indic:
    "Assamese" :0.01
    "Odia" : 0.04
   "Gujarati" : 0.04
    "Marathi" : 0.05
    "Punjabi" :  0.05
    "Kannada" :  0.06
   "Nepali ": 0.07
    "Telugu" : 0.09
    "Malayalam" : 0.10
    "Urdu" : 0.10
    "Tamil" :  0.20
    "Bengali" :  0.50
    "Hindi" : 0.70
    
```
</td></tr> </table>


| Indic     |  Percentage |
| ---       |      ---    |
| Assamese  |     0.01%   |
| Odia      |     0.04%   |
| Gujarati  |     0.04%   |
| Marathi   |     0.05%   |
| Punjabi   |     0.05%   |
| Kannada   |     0.06%   |
| Nepali    |     0.07%   |
| Telugu    |     0.09%   |
| Malayalam |     0.10%   |
| Urdu      |     0.10%   |
| Tamil     |     0.20%   |
| Bengali   |     0.50%   |
| Hindi     |     0.70%   |

## Metrics 
*This section describes the different ways performance is calculated, and why.*

Forthcoming. Includes:

| Metric             | Why chosen                                                         |
|--------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| F1                 | Standard for benchmarking                                          |
| Accuracy           | Standard for benchmarking                                          |
| Perplexity         | Standard metric for quantifying model improvements during training |
| Cross Entropy Loss | Standard objective for language models                             |


##  Results
*Results are based on the Factors and Metrics defined above.*

### Train-time evaluation
As we train, we calculate loss and perplexity. 

-  Current Loss:______

-   Perplexity per language:



## Recommendations

*This section provides information on warnings and potential mitigations.*

-   Indirect users should be made aware when the content they're working with is created by the LLM.

-   Users should be aware of [Risks and Limitations](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uQ_w-DlBsqAm8i_PEAs6HUVxmZ60yhfvrFDcvvMd8os/edit#heading=h.4tt8m5ymlink), and include an appropriate age disclaimer or blocking interface as necessary.

-   Models pre-trained with the LLM should include an updated Model Card.

-   Users of the model should provide mechanisms for those affected to provide feedback, such as an email address for comments.



## Glossary and Calculations

*This section defines common terms and how metrics are calculated*

-   **Loss:** A calculation of the difference between what the model has learned and what the data shows ("groundtruth"). The lower the loss, the better. The training process aims to minimize the loss. 


-   **Perplexity:** This is based on what the model estimates the probability of new data is. The lower the perplexity, the better.  If the model is 100% correct at predicting the next token it will see, then the perplexity is 1. Mathematically this is calculated using entropy. 

-   **High-stakes settings:** Such as those identified as "high-risk AI systems" and "unacceptable risk AI systems" in the European Union's proposed [Artificial Intelligence (AI) Act](https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/annexes/)

-   **Critical decisions**: Such as those defined in [the United States' proposed Algorithmic Accountability Act](https://www.congress.gov/117/bills/s3572/BILLS-117s3572is.pdf).

-   **Human Rights**: Includes those rights defined in the [Universal Declaration of Human Rights](https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/2021/03/udhr.pdf).

-  **Personal Data and Information**: Personal data and information is defined in multiple data protection regulations, such as "[personal data](https://gdpr-info.eu/issues/personal-data/)" in the [European Union's General Data Protection Regulation](https://gdpr-info.eu); and "personal information" in the Republic of South Africa's [Protection of Personal Information Act](https://www.gov.za/sites/default/files/gcis_document/201409/3706726-11act4of2013popi.pdf), The People's Republic of China's [Personal information protection law](http://en.npc.gov.cn.cdurl.cn/2021-12/29/c_694559.htm).
  
- **Sensitive Characteristics**: This includes specifically protected categories in human rights (see [UHDR, Article 2](https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/2021/03/udhr.pdf)) and personal information regulation (see GDPR, [Article 9; Protection of Personal Information Act, Chapter 1](https://www.gov.za/sites/default/files/gcis_document/201409/3706726-11act4of2013popi.pdf))

- **Deception:** Doing something to intentionally mislead individuals to believe something that is false, such as by creating deadbots or chatbots on social media posing as real people, or generating text documents without making consumers aware that the text is machine generated.

## Contributors
